TOKYO—Japan’s consumer prices rose at the slowest pace in nearly two years in January, but came in above expectations, backing views that the central bank will exit its negative interest rate policy, albeit cautiously.

Overall consumer prices rose 2.2% from a year earlier in January, mainly due to lower energy prices, government data showed Tuesday. That marked the slowest pace of growth since March 2022, and was down from the 2.6% increase seen in December but still above the Bank of Japan’s 2% inflation target.

Weakening inflation would make it difficult for the Bank of Japan to make a significant policy shift, economists say. Many expect the BOJ to end negative interest rates this spring.

“The BOJ will still do away with negative interest rates come April, but given the dire state of the economy, it will be hard to raise interest rates beyond zero,” said Stefan Angrick, an economist at Moody’s Analytics.

He thinks inflation will likely fall back below 2% by the end of the year.

The central bank’s policy board is scheduled to hold its next policy-setting meeting on March 18-19. Wage negotiations due that month, in which companies and unions meet to discuss pay for the year ahead, will be closely watched, with widespread wage increases building the case for a rate increase, analysts say.

Tuesday’s data leaves the door open to a rate increase at the March meeting if the preliminary results of the spring wage negotiations are encouraging, said Marcel Thieliant, head of Asia-Pacific at Capital Economics. But it remains more likely that the BOJ will wait until April, he added.

“The Bank [of Japan] will present forecasts for FY2026 for the first time at its April meeting, which allow it to signal that it expects its 2% inflation target to be sustained in the long run,” Thieliant said.

Consumer inflation excluding volatile fresh food and energy, a measure for underlying inflation, increased 3.5% from a year earlier in January, compared with December’s 3.7% rise, the data showed.

The yen strengthened against other G-10 and Asian currencies after the release of the inflation data, while Japanese government bonds fell.